---
layout: post
title: 2022 APFS Advent Challenge Day 8 - Object Maps
---

Earlier in this series, we [discussed APFS _Containers_](/post/2022/12/05/APFS-Containers) and how they address _physical objects_ via a fixed block size. This was followed up with a discussion on [enumerating _Checkpoint Maps_](/post/2022/12/07/APFS-Checkpoint-Maps) to locate _ephemeral objects_. The last remaining kind of objects that we need to know how to find are _virtual objects_. Today, we will discuss an essential specialization of [_B-Trees_](/post/2022/12/08/APFS-BTrees), the _Object Map_ (OMAP), and their critical role in managing these virtual objects in APFS.

Object Maps perform two essential roles in APFS.  They facilitate the address translation needed to locate virtual objects on disk and provide snapshot capabilities that can instantly roll back the set of virtual objects to an earlier point in time.   The Container and each Volume maintain their own independent OMAPs.  Each OMAP has its own virtual address space, so when dereferencing a virtual object, it is essential to understand how that object is used to know which object map to query.

## On-Disk Structures

_OMAP Objects_ have a relatively straightforward on-disk structure. Along with some minor metadata, the primary use of the OMAP Object is to store the physical address of its tree. Optionally, they also store an address to a _Snapshot Tree_.  Both trees are structured as _B-Tree Objects_.

Incidentally, there are indications that APFS was intended to support more than one type of tree structure. Until recently, Apple’s [`apfs.kext`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loadable_kernel_module) contained references to an undocumented “M-Tree” type, which appeared to be designed to be used in place of B-Trees in some instances. M-Trees are never mentioned in [Apple’s APFS File System Reference](https://developer.apple.com/support/downloads/Apple-File-System-Reference.pdf), I have never seen them on disk, and all references of M-Trees were removed from the macOS 13 `apfs.kext`.


```cpp
typedef struct omap_phys {
    obj_phys_t om_o;                // 0x00
    uint32_t om_flags;              // 0x20
    uint32_t om_snap_count;         // 0x24
    uint32_t om_tree_type;          // 0x28
    uint32_t om_snapshot_tree_type; // 0x2C
    oid_t om_tree_oid;              // 0x30
    oid_t om_snapshot_tree_oid;     // 0x38
    xid_t om_most_recent_snap;      // 0x40
    xid_t om_pending_revert_min;    // 0x48
    xid_t om_pending_revert_max;    // 0x50
} omap_phys_t;                      // 0x58
```
- `om_o`: The object header
- `om_flags`: OMAP flags (see below)
- `om_snap_count`: The number of snapshots
- `om_tree_type`: The type of OMAP tree.  This is currently always a _physical_ _B-Tree Root Node_
- `om_snapshot_tree_type`: The type of Snapshot tree.  This is currently always a _physical_ _B-Tree Root Node_
- `om_tree_oid`: The _physical object identifier_ of the omap's B-Tree
- `om_snapshot_tree_oid`: The _physical object identifier_ of the snapshot's B-Tree or zero if there is none.
- `om_most_recent_snap`: The _transaction identifier_ of the latest snapshot
- `om_pending_revert_min`: The earliest transaction identifier for an in-progress revert
- `om_pending_revert_max`: The latest transaction identifier for an in-progress revert

_NOTE: Apple's APFS File System Reference incorrectly lists the `om_tree_oid` and `om_snapshot_tree_oid` members as _virtual object identifiers_ when they are, in fact, _physical_.


#### Object Map Flags

{: style="margin-left: 0"}
Name | Value | Description
---- | ----- | -----------
OMAP_MANUALLY_MANAGED | 0x00000001 | Does not support snapshots
OMAP_ENCRYPTING | 0x00000002 | Encryption in progress
OMAP_DECRYPTING | 0x00000004 | Decryption in progress
OMAP_KEYROLLING | 0x00000008 | Encryption key change in progress
OMAP_CRYPTO_GENERATION | 0x00000010 | Encryption change marker (more on this later)

### Object Map B-Tree

An OMAP tree is a specialized B-Tree type that maps fixed-size `omap_key_t` and `omap_value_t` key/value pairs.  There can be more than one referenced object with the same virtual object identifier (`oid`) stored in the tree.  Transaction identifiers (`xid`) are stored to identify these versions.  

Keys are sorted in ascending order, first by `oid` and then `xid`.  Values contain the size and physical address of the mapped object.  We will discuss APFS encryption in the future, but for now, it is sufficient to note that `omap_value_t` marks encrypted objects via the `OMAP_VAL_ENCRYPTED` bit-flag.

```cpp
typedef struct omap_key {
    oid_t ok_oid; // 0x00
    xid_t ok_xid; // 0x08
} omap_key_t;     // 0x10
```
- `ok_oid`: The mapped object's _virtual object identifier_
- `ok_xid`: The mapped object's _transaction identifier_

```cpp
typedef struct omap_val {
    uint32_t ov_flags; // 0x00
    uint32_t ov_size;  // 0x04
    paddr_t ov_paddr;  // 0x08
} omap_val_t;          // 0x10
```
- `ov_flags`: OMAP value flags (see below)
- `ov_size`: Size of the mapped object (in bytes)
- `ov_paddr`: The _physical address_ of the start of the mapped object

#### Object Map Value Flags

{: style="margin-left: 0"}
Name | Value | Description
---- | ----- | -----------
OMAP_VAL_DELETED | 0x00000001 | Object mapping has been removed from the map and this is a placeholder
OMAP_VAL_SAVED | 0x00000002 | This object mapping shouldnʼt be replaced when the object is updated. (_currently unused_)
OMAP_VAL_ENCRYPTED | 0x00000004 | The mapped object is encrypted
OMAP_VAL_NOHEADER | 0x00000008 | The mapped object has a zero'd _object header_
OMAP_VAL_CRYPTO_GENERATION | 0x00000010 | Encryption change marker

### Object Map Snapshot Tree

Checkpoint OMAPs also maintain an entry for each of their snapshots in a Snapshot Tree.  These trees map `xid_t` transaction identifiers to `omap_snapshot_t` values.  Other than the deletion state of a snapshot, there is very little information to be gained from enumerating this tree.  Volumes maintain additional trees that store more detailed metadata about snapshots.  We will discuss those trees in the future.

```cpp
typedef struct omap_snapshot {
    uint32_t oms_flags; // 0x00
    uint32_t oms_pad;   // 0x04
    oid_t oms_oid;      // 0x08
} omap_snapshot_t;      // 0x10
```
- `oms_flags` - OMAP Snapshot Flags (see below)
- `oms_pad` - _padding_
- `oms_oid` - _reserved and unused_

{: style="margin-left: 0"}
Name | Value | Description
---- | ----- | -----------
OMAP_SNAPSHOT_DELETED | 0x00000001 | The snapshot has been deleted
OMAP_SNAPSHOT_REVERTED | 0x00000002 | The snapshot has been deleted as part of a revert

## Parsing Object Maps

Once you understand the structure of the OMAP key/value pairs, the process of parsing an OMAP is the same as [parsing other B-Trees](/post/2022/12/09/APFS-BTrees-2).  When looking up a virtual object from the active filesystem state, choose the key with the highest `xid` available.  If parsing the state from a snapshot, ignore all keys whose `xid` is greater than the `xid` of the snapshot in question.

## Conclusion

Object Maps are an essential component of APFS that serve two key roles. They provide the address translation needed to locate virtual objects on disk and enable snapshot capabilities that allow instant rollback to earlier points in time.

Now that we’ve covered the basics, it's time for us to start diving deeper into APFS and learn how to parse information from the file systems themselves. Check back tomorrow when we begin discussing APFS Volumes and their file systems.



{% include advent2022.html %}